13. Other Geometries: The Ellipse, the Helix, and Pentagram
197
The rotation in Figure 13.3 of the four slices of the cone shows how the geometries of a circle, ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola are related. We are interested in the circle and ellipse, though cycles emulate the parabola and hyperbola by circling back from the right side of the page to the left again in an endless loop.
We can see that the ellipse is a shadow of a circle. A circle only has one dimension. An ellipse, being the shadow of a circle, is also one-dimensional. The difference is in the number of focus points. The ellipse has two at points ‘a’ and ‘b’ in Figure 13.4a. The angle of the slice through the cone that creates an ellipse has limits—a flat angle takes us back to a circle; too steep an angle and we are creating a parabola. A slice straight down defines hyperbolic space. All four geometries will eventually fold back onto themselves. A new theory of the universe is gaining credibility: that space is not infinite, but finite due to the folding back principles of non-Euclid geometries.
An ellipse on a 60° angle creates the ideal proportions for precise harmonic intervals. The ellipse so described will also exhibit internal relationships with Fibonacci ratio proportions. (As example lines B:C should look very familiar to you.) I did not list all the harmonic intervals that these subdivisions create in Figure 13.4a; just enough for you to see that the Pythagorean intervals are present. For analysts deep into geometry applications on charts, just know that the ellipse should be drawn at a 60° angle always. I have not studied cycles from the internal harmonic intervals, though I am very aware of their presence and why the ellipse is of great interest for some traders.
Figure 13.4b is the EURJPY in a 2-month bar chart. You will see that the detailed figure from 13.4a has been used to overlay the EURJPY data. The ellipse itself must be tilted 60°. The angle was drawn on the chart, and then the image was put over the graph. The difficulty in all software programs today is that vendors do not realize that the width-to-length ratio of the ellipse itself should be fixed. Without a way to measure the units of length and width, or have it automatically proportioned to what is shown in Figures 13.4a and 13.4b, it is nearly impossible to use it correctly. I know my actual ellipse outline is a tad funky. I had to use a French curve within software, and it was a tough challenge to connect the required dots of the ellipse in a smooth arc. But this diagram is accurate and gives all the correct proportions. Figure 13.4b is helped by the imperfect ellipse arc line, as it is clear that the inserted ellipse on the chart is the original drawn in Figure 13.4a. If you do apply this geometry, the 60° tilt of the midline axis is a must—that is, the line from X1 to X2. The sharp decline in the Euro Currency against the Japanese Yen dropped to the midline and outer dimensional boundary of the ellipse. People who use this tool find it of value. We can see that extending a right-angled line from X2 and the 60° centerline from X1 to X2 provides a major trendline of resistance which EURJPY is tracking. I do not use this method as I am unable to plot and maintain the correct proportions and angle in my charts. This is not a random tool that just happens to be ellipse-shaped in any ratio for its length to width.
B. THE HELIX, SQUARE OF 19, AND SPIRAL CHARTING
Consider the math required to accurately render the spiral of a seashell. Venezuelan artist Rafael Araujo has painstakingly rendered nature in all its mathematical wonder in Figures 13.5a and 13.5b. Figure 13.5b begins to look like a Gann chart. Then consider the math required to accurately render two moving butterflies ascending in a double helix as you look down upon their wings, spiraling near and far from view, and continuing to ascend upwards until your angle of view is looking at the bottom of their wing patterns. Each geometric relationship of the butterfly’s size, angle change, and wing pattern must remain true to the geometric laws of proportional geometry as we see in Figure 13.6. The mathematics required by hand is a staggering accomplishment. It can only be accomplished using proportional geometry.
Nature is at the heart of Gann’s understanding of geometry. The Gann Wheels are logarithmic helix calculators.
Figure 13.7 gives an overhead view of a logarithmic helix as you look down the z-axis. It is what we see when we use Gann’s Wheels. Circular, hexagon, or square patterned Wheels are all helix configurations. Figure 13.8 shows you what happens as I rotate the z-axis to become perfectly vertical in the bottom graph of the logarithmic spiral. Rafael Araujo’s website has an image called Logarithmic Spiral. From this geometry he can create with precision numerous helix drawings of butterflies in flight.¹
Figure 13.9 shows you how a spiral chart on an x-axis would develop in time. Have we applied this concept to any charts in prior chapters? Yes. Revisit Figure 10.14 when a Pythagorean spiral was being plotted. The overhead view of the helix was on the z-axis, and the spiral moved forward and backwards on the x- and y-axis.
The most common application will be on the y-axis for price projection when we read price targets from Gann’s Wheels. Are Gann’s increasing rings of the Wheel’s expansion cycle logarithmic? It’s hard to see in a small scale. The best way to prove it to yourself is to look at a market with a wide price range like the Nikkei in Figure 13.10.
¹ They are gorgeous in color. Please visit http://www.rafael-araujo.com/

The heaviest black horizontal lines of the Square of Nine mark the 360° angles in each new outer square of the wheel. With each rotation we can see how the spread between the 360° angles increases, plotting a wider range for each ring of the wheel. Few recognize that Gann’s Wheels are indeed logarithmic helix spirals. If you return to Figure 13.5 it will be easier for you to see the logarithmic relationship from the top to bottom along the side walls of the shell drawing.
C. SINE WAVES ARE ANGLES AND RATIOS
Before we move forward, I need to help you recognize that the fixed period cycles conventionally used in our industry are angles and ratios. Picture a single point on a circle as it rolls along in a straight line. The circle is moving forward at a constant speed and the shape of the ball is perfectly round. Therefore, we see the familiar umbrella pattern under our price data or vertical lines where the single point meets the x-axis along the bottom. We know that the fixed period of the cycle is called the wavelength. Our industry always assumes that wavelength equals ‘1’ or has a fixed repeating interval between cycle lows. From J. H. Hurst we know the Principle of Summation. By adding multiple cycles of various fixed periods we form a single cycle which is suggested to be the cause of such price patterns as Head-and-Shoulders and so forth. It has been our industry norm for decades. But what if we are overlooking an important point?
What if the wavelength, called lambda, is not always equal to one? What if lambda is less than one? What if it is greater than one? Figure 13.11 shows us what this would look like.
We can plot the circle as a sine wave. A sine wave is called a circular function, but more commonly known as a trigonometric function of an angle. Figure 13.12 reminds us that a sine wave is equal to the opposite divided by the hypotenuse of a triangle. But to know the length of the y-axis segment or opposite side to the angle of the rise, we have to know the cosine (θ). It is trigonometry that defines the circle. But if that is true, we must accept that to be working with circles is to be working with ratios as demonstrated in Figure 13.13. The applied analysis of ratios has greater potential than most cycle work today when only fixed periods are utilized.
D. SQUARE OF 19 AND SQUARE ROOTS
Please jump forward to Figure 20.18 to view the square root Spiral of Theodorus up to the triangle with a Hypotenuse of √31. Then page back to the geometric work of Ali Ibn Muhammad in Figure 12.1 to see another illustration showing that the spiral growth and contraction is based on the ratio of proportional triangles. The hypotenuse of √19 completes one full spiral cycle and begins the next spiral. Not on the exact cusp, but just past it. This fact is important and is the reason that there is a logarithmic factor to a helix.

The number 19 is a prime number and 19 × 19 equals 361. If you could visualize the square to the sixth root of a complex number z, in polar form … what would it look like? In Figure 13.14 I have added a heavy black radian with an arrow to mark each of the principle roots. The complex number Z equals re^(iφ). It is one of those funky numbers that does not exist, so we give it the name ‘i’ and carry on by just admitting it is complex. Along the way you realize that you don’t have to solve for ‘i’ anyway. The visualization answer to the question of the square to sixth root of a complex number allows us to look past all the math. The takeaway from these results is that when they are plotted in polar form, we can see the divisions we are familiar with and understand that squares derived from the square to sixth root are the divisions we are working with every day in a Gann Wheel from squares.
Another thing to know is that a natural number is called a perfect square if it is the square of a natural number. That statement kind of folds back into itself I’d agree. But it means, therefore, that 361 is a Perfect Square. Few people know this to be true and those who understand its properties tell very few people. One application of this that I use is to count the squares in calendar days knowing that the square of 19, or 361, days from a major pivot date is more significant than other square calendar-day counts; it is always a major date to watch closely. We will go into the method step-by-step in Chapter 26.
There are a few things to know about squares before we continue:
1. Squares and cubes of even numbers are always even.
2. The squares and cubes of odd numbers are always odd.

3. A perfect square can always be expressed as the product of prime factors.
Questions:
1. How many natural numbers lie between 18² and 19²? (Ans: 36, bringing us back to the number set of 9, 18, 36, 72, and 144, which is the square of 12.)
2. Which is the square of an odd number? 144, 256, or 361? (Ans: 361) Re-read no. 2 above.
3. A perfect square will never have in the ones place holder which of the following numbers? 5, 6, 1, or 3? (Ans: 3)
There is a book you must read, Plato’s Cosmology: The Timaeus of Plato.² I will post a long passage from it at 32ndJewel.com. The book is long out of print, but can be located when libraries sell off their stock. The book is a running lecture by Professor Cornford, who believes that understanding the ancient Greek words ὄγκοι and δυνάμεις as “cubes” and “squares” offers the only interpretation that makes sense. On page 47 of Plato’s Cosmology Cornford quotes Sir Thomas Heath from Greek Mathematics, i, p.89. Heath writes:
By planes and solids he [Plato in this passage] really means square and cube numbers, and his remark is equivalent to stating that, if p², q² are two square numbers, p² : pq = pq : q² , while, if p³, q³ are two cubed numbers, p³ : p²q = p² : pq² = pq² : q³ , the means being of course in continued geometric proportion. Euclid proves the properties for square and cube numbers in viii. 11, 12 and for similar plane and solid numbers in viii. 18, 19. Nicomachus (ii. 24, 6, 7) quotes the substance of Plato’s remark as a “Platonic theorem,” adding in explanation the equivalent of Euclid viii. 11, 12.
Cornford then states on page 47, “This interpretation of the ambiguous words ὄγκοι and δυνάμεις as ‘cubes’ and ‘squares’ seems to be better supported than any other … Here, as in many other places, Plato is compressing his statement of technical matters to such a point that only expert readers would fully appreciate his meaning.”
Professor Cornford goes on to say near the bottom of page 47, “The interpretation can be further supported by a consideration of Adrastus’ treatment of geometrical proportion. He says that geometrical proportion is the only proportion in the full and proper sense and the primary one, because all others require it, but it does not require them.”³
The square of 19 holds a special place of perfection being 361. It is neither the double proportion described by Plato as 1, 2, 4, 8, nor is it Plato’s triple proportion such as 1, 3, 9, 27. Double and triple proportion is the Platonic theorem of harmony, but there is another plane or dimension. It is the dimension of the square of 19, a dimension only Nicomachus touched upon, giving a clue that there is a third plane of numbers.
It is Nicomachus who also makes a point I would like to offer to those who believe the only viable approach to markets is through algebraic scientific means. No matter how hard you may stare at the algebraic formula for a circle, it cannot express the concept of a circle being round.
² F. M. Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology: The Timaeus of Plato (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 1937), 310–368. Cornford’s discussion from pages 44 to 93 is of particular importance.
³ The full passage of Adrastus is quoted by Dupuis, Theon of Smyrna (Paris, 1892), p. 177.

The square of 19 has its own unique properties as a harmonic series. In Chapter 12, in Figure 12.1 we saw the geometric spiral drawn by Ali Ibn Muhammad containing the proportional growth of internal triangles. In Chapter 20, Figure 20.18 will show you a more detailed construction of Theodorus’ Spiral. Plato writes in Timaeus passages 53c, d the following:
53c. In the first place, then, it is of course obvious to anyone that fire, earth, water, and air are bodies; and all body has depth. Depth, moreover, must be bounded by surface; and every surface that is rectilinear is composed of triangles. Now all triangles are derived from two, each having one
53d. right angle and the other angles acute. Of these triangles, one has on either side the half of a right angle, the division of which is determined by equal sides (the right-angled isosceles); the other has unequal parts of a right angle allotted to unequal sides (the right-angled scalene).
Cornford explains below this quote from Timaeus on page 212: “Plato intends to construct his solids out of triangles without pursuing the analysis of the triangles themselves into simpler principles. Any rectilinear plane face is ‘composed’ of triangles, in the sense that it can be divided up into triangles; and the triangle, as the surface contained by the minimum number of straight lines, is ‘assumed’ as the irreducible ‘element’ of all such figures. Plato indicates that there is something arbitrary in starting from this assumption. If planes can be constructed of triangles, triangles themselves can be constructed of lines, and lines can be expressed as numbers. We have already had a hint of this in the phrase “giving them a distinct configuration by means of (geometrical) shapes and numbers.”
Without knowing it, Professor Cornford had just defined one of the core principle theorems of Gann Analysis and a description of the spiral properties of Gann’s Wheels.
E. THE PENTAGRAM
Figure 13.15 is an extremely important diagram to understand. The pentagram contains five Golden Triangles into each point with angles of 72°, 36°, 72° each. The figure itself is constructed from three Golden Triangles. Connect the apex of the two bottom points and this outlines one of the Golden Triangles pointing north. Two others on the sides point East and West.
The figure has a fractal property. The inner pentagon can be subdivided to create an inverted mirror of the larger pentagram figure. These inverted interior points are astrological midpoints. This is where the phrase “wheel-within-wheel” originates. The five points subdivide the 360° circle into five equal angles of 72°.
The ancients saw this figure in the sky. Figure 13.16 shows three Heliocentric Venus–Earth conjunctions. We will complete the pentagram in this manner. By capturing the ephemeris position of five successive conjunctions, we can then draw the pattern. Use the first as the base image. Then, using a transparency image, overlay the next four conjunctions while being careful to keep the same registration for each image. Figure 13.16 maps 1998/01/19, 1999/08/27, and 2001/04/02. Figure 13.17 adds the conjunctions of Venus and Earth on the next culminations of 2002/11/03 and 2004/06/12. Now, draw a line to connect the conjunctions in their chronological order. They do not connect clockwise or anti-clockwise. The time series jumps from side to side creating the pentagram clock.
As the next series of five conjunctions form, the next sequence of five will shift very slightly (did I read 36° is the maximum shift? I cannot find it again on the NASA site.) The slight shift is due to the Earth being on a tilted axis. Be it 36° or not, the whole figure snaps back to the placement you see in Figure 13.17 when the five conjunctions once again start the minor shift until it snaps back to the starting position exactly. It is a clock in the sky since the beginning of Figure 13.17. Venus Pentagram.
time. Understanding time in the ancient world meant power. Families guarded their astronomical knowledge from father to son very closely.
The Hexagon or Star of David can be defined from the Geocentric conjunctions of Sun and Mercury in Figure 13.18. A sample set of dates for you to use are 2006/03/12, 2006/05/18, 2006/07/18, 2006/09/04, 2006/11/09, and 2007/01/09. This is not an important time set, other
Figure 13.18. Sun Conjunct Mercury.
than I had used these dates in my seminars. You can see this is a faster cycle. The conjunctions of 2006/03/12, 2006/07/18, and 2006/11/09 culminate when Mercury is in retrograde motion. When the time beat involves retrograde motion, it is deemed an “inferior” conjunction versus a superior conjunction. I’ve never tested the difference to see if it made a difference as a Time Factor with weighting.






